.\" $XConsortium: makeg.man /main/1 1996/02/02 18:48:20 gildea $
.\" Copyright (c) 1996  X Consortium
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
.\" a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
.\" distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
.\" permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
.\" the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
.\" included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE X CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
.\" OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
.\" ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
.\" OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name of the X Consortium shall
.\" not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or
.\" other dealings in this Software without prior written authorization
.\" from the X Consortium.
.\"
.TH MAKEG 1 "Release 6.1" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
makeg \- make a debuggable executable
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B makeg
[
.I make-options .\|.\|.
] [
.I targets  .\|.\|.
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I makeg
script runs
.I make,
passing it variable settings to create a debuggable target when used
with a Makefile generated by
.I imake.
For example, it arranges for the C compiler to be called with the
.B \-g
option.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 8
.B MAKE
The
.I make
program to use.  Default ``make''.
.TP 8
.B GDB
Set to a non-null value if using the
.I gdb
debugger on Solaris 2, which requires additional debugging options to
be passed to the compiler.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.I make (1),
.I imake (1)
