.\" $XConsortium: xmkmf.man /main/8 1996/09/28 16:17:10 rws $
.\" Copyright (c) 1993, 1994  X Consortium
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), 
.\" to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation 
.\" the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, 
.\" and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the 
.\" Software furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL 
.\" THE X CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, 
.\" WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF 
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE 
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name of the X Consortium shall not 
.\" be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use or other 
.\" dealing in this Software without prior written authorization from the 
.\" X Consortium.
.TH XMKMF 1 "Release 6.1" "X Version 11"
.SH NAME
xmkmf \- create a Makefile from an Imakefile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xmkmf
[ -a ] [
.I topdir
[
.I curdir
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I xmkmf
command is the normal way to create a
.I Makefile 
from an
.I Imakefile
shipped with third-party software.
.PP
When invoked with no arguments in a directory containing an
.I Imakefile,
the
.I imake
program is run with arguments appropriate for your system
(configured into
.I xmkmf
when X was built) and generates a
.I Makefile.
.PP
When invoked with the
.I \-a
option,
.I xmkmf
builds the
.I Makefile
in the current directory, and then automatically executes
``make Makefiles'' (in case there are subdirectories),
``make includes'',
and ``make depend'' for you.
This is the normal way to configure software that is outside
the X Consortium build tree.
.PP
If working inside the X Consortium build tree (unlikely unless you 
are an X developer, and even then this option is never really used), the
.I topdir
argument should be specified as the relative pathname from the
current directory to the top of the build tree.  Optionally,
.I curdir
may be specified as a relative pathname from the top of the build
tree to the current directory.  It is necessary to supply
.I curdir
if the current directory has subdirectories, or the
.I Makefile
will not be able to build the subdirectories.
If a
.I topdir
is given,
.I xmkmf
assumes nothing is installed on your system and looks for files in
the build tree instead of using the installed versions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
imake(1)
