'\" t
.\" ** The above line should force tbl to be a preprocessor **
.\" Man page for Xvnc
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001 Red Hat, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 Constantin Kaplinsky
.\" Copyright (C) 2005-2008 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 2010, 2012 D. R. Commander
.\" Copyright (C) 2010 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file LICENCE.TXT that comes with the
.\" TightVNC distribution.
.\"
.TH Xvnc 1 "Nov 2012" "" "TurboVNC"
.SH NAME
Xvnc \- an X server providing VNC connectivity
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
\fBXvnc\fR
[:\fIdisplay\fR]
[\-geometry \fIwidth\fRx\fIheight\fR] [\-depth \fIdepth\fR]
[\-pixelformat rgb\fINNN\fR|bgr\fINNN\fR] [\-udpinputport \fIport\fR]
[\-rfbport \fIport\fR] [\-rfbwait \fItime\fR] [\-nocursor]
[\-rfbauth \fIpasswd-file\fR] [\-otpauth] [\-pamauth]
[\-noreverse] [\-noclipboardsend] [\-noclipboardrecv]
[\-idletimeout \fItime\fR] [\-httpd \fIdir\fR]
[\-httpport \fIport\fR] [\-deferupdate \fItime\fR] [\-noflowcontrol]
[\-alr \fItime\fR]
[\-alrqual \fIlevel\fR] [\-alrsamp \fI1X | 2X | 4X | gray\fR]
[\-interframe] [\-nointerframe]
[\-economictranslate] [\-desktop \fIname\fR] [\-alwaysshared]
[\-nevershared] [\-dontdisconnect] [\-viewonly] [\-localhost]
[\-interface ipaddr] [\-ipv6] [\-inetd] [\-compatiblekbd]
[\fIX-options\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBXvnc\fR is a VNC (Virtual Network Computing) server for Unix and Linux
systems.  It acts like a normal X server, except that it sends its output
to a virtual rather than a physical display.  Remote machines can connect
to the VNC server and see/control the output of this virtual display
[see \fBvncviewer\fR(1).]  Xvnc is built using the XFree86 source code and
shares many options with it.

Normally, you don't need to start Xvnc manually-- use the
\fBvncserver\fR(1) wrapper script instead.  This script sets reasonable
defaults for the Xvnc session, checks many error conditions, etc.

Please read the SECURITY CONCERNS section if you plan to use VNC on an
untrusted network.
.SH OPTIONS
Xvnc supports many standard X server options and a number of
VNC-specific options.  To see which standard X server options are
supported, please look at the output of \fBXvnc\fR \fI\-help\fR and read
the \fBXserver\fR(1) manual page.

The VNC-specific options are as follows:
.TP
\fB\-geometry\fR \fIwidth\fR\fBx\fR\fIheight\fR
Set width and height of the virtual X display.
.TP
\fB\-pixelformat\fR \fBrgb\fR\fINNN\fR|\fBbgr\fR\fINNN\fR
Specify the pixel format of the virtual X display.  Xvnc can use any pixel
format you choose, but if this pixel format does not match the pixel format
of the display on which vncviewer is running, then Xvnc will perform pixel
format conversion prior to sending images to vncviewer.  This can slow
performance.  The default pixel format, rgb888, is equivalent to BGRA on little
endian systems or ARGB on big endian systems.  A pixel format of bgr888 is
equivalent to RGBA on little endian systems or ABGR on big endian systems.
.TP
\fB\-udpinputport\fR \fIport\fR
UDP port for keyboard/pointer data.
.TP
\fB\-rfbport\fR \fIport\fR
TCP port that the server should use when listening for connections from normal
VNC clients.
.TP
\fB\-rfbwait\fR \fItime\fR
Maximum time, in milliseconds, to wait for an RFB client (VNC viewer.)
.TP
\fB\-nocursor\fR
Don't display a mouse pointer on the remote desktop.
.TP
\fB\-rfbauth\fR \fIpasswd-file\fR
Enable the VNC password authentication method and read the VNC password from
the specified file.  The \fIpasswd-file\fR can be created using the
\fBvncpasswd\fR(1) utility.  This argument has no effect if
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is specified in the authentication configuration
file and "vnc" is not listed as a permitted method.
.TP
\fB\-otpauth\fR
Enable the one-time password (OTP) authentication method.  One-time passwords
for full control or view-only access can be created using the
\fBvncpasswd\fR(1) utility.  OTPs are discarded by Xvnc immediately after they
are used, so an additional OTP must be generated before another user is allowed
to connect using this method.  This argument has no effect if
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is specified in the authentication configuration
file and "otp" is not listed as a permitted method.
.TP
\fB\-pamauth\fR
Enable the PAM user/password authentication method, which supports the
"Unix login" authentication scheme.  Additional configuration is necessary
to make this work (see the AUTHENTICATION CONFIGURATION FILE section for
details.)  This argument has no effect if \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is
specified in the authentication configuration file and "pam-userpwd" is not
listed as a permitted method.
.TP
\fB\-noreverse\fR
Do not allow reverse VNC connections to be made from this Xvnc session.
This option can be set for all TurboVNC sessions on this system by using the
\fIno-reverse-connections\fR directive in the authentication configuration
file.  See the AUTHENTICATION CONFIGURATION FILE section for more details.
.TP
\fB-noclipboardsend\fR
Disable outbound clipboard synchronization.  This prevents the clipboard of
any connected viewers from being synchronized with the clipboard of the
TurboVNC session whenever the latter changes.  This option can be set for all
TurboVNC sessions on this system by using the \fIno-clipboard-send\fR
directive in the authentication configuration file.  See the AUTHENTICATION
CONFIGURATION FILE section for more details.
.TP
\fB-noclipboardrecv\fR
Disable inbound clipboard synchronization.  This prevents the clipboard of
the TurboVNC session from being synchronized with the clipboard of a connected
viewer whenever the latter changes.  This option can be set for all
TurboVNC sessions on this system by using the \fIno-clipboard-recv\fR
directive in the authentication configuration file.  See the AUTHENTICATION
CONFIGURATION FILE section for more details.
.TP
\fB\-idletimeout\fR \fItime\fR
Time, in seconds, which the TurboVNC Server can sit idle (with no VNC viewer
connections) before it automatically exits (default: no timeout.)  This
argument has no effect if the \fImax-idle-timeout\fR directive is specified in
the authentication configuration file and if that value is lower than
\fItime\fR.
.TP
\fB\-httpd\fR \fIdir\fR
Specify directory where the Java viewer classes are located.
.TP
\fB\-httpport\fR \fIport\fR
TCP port that the server should use when listening for connections from
Java-enabled web browsers.
.TP
\fB\-deferupdate\fR \fItime\fR
Time, in milliseconds, for which to defer screen updates (default: 40).
Deferring updates helps to coalesce many small desktop changes into a few
larger updates, thus saving network bandwidth.
.TP
\fB\-noflowcontrol\fR
Normally, the TurboVNC Server will use the RFB flow control extensions
(Continuous Updates and Fence) with any connected viewers that support them.
These extensions allow the server to send framebuffer updates at the maximum
rate that the network connection and the viewer can handle, instead of waiting
for viewers to explicitly request updates.  Disabling flow control causes the
TurboVNC Server to send framebuffer updates at the maximum rate that the
network connection can handle, irrespective of the viewer.  For full-screen
video and 3D applications, this may produce smoother animation on high-latency
networks, although it will almost certainly also produce a noticeable lag
between mouse movement and application response, since the TCP buffers will be
100% full.
.TP
\fB\-alr\fR \fItime\fR
Enable the automatic lossless refresh (ALR) feature for this Xvnc session and
set the timeout to \fItime\fR seconds.  If ALR is enabled and no framebuffer
updates have been sent to a given client in the past \fItime\fR seconds, and if
"eligible" areas of the screen have been transmitted to that client using JPEG
since the last lossless refresh, then those areas of the screen are
re-transmitted using mathematically lossless image compression (specifically,
the Lossless Tight + Zlib encoding method.)

The default ALR behavior is that only regions that were drawn using
X[Shm]PutImage() are eligible for ALR.  This is designed to work in conjunction
with VirtualGL and to prevent blinking cursors from confusing the ALR
algorithm.  You can, however, set the \fBTVNC_ALRALL\fR environment variable to
\fB1\fR to make all screen regions eligible for ALR.
.TP
\fB\-alrqual\fR \fIlevel\fR
Instead of sending a mathematically lossless image for an automatic lossless
refresh, send a JPEG image with the specified JPEG quality (95 is a good
choice, as this is the equivalent of the "Tight + Perceptually Lossless JPEG"
preset.)
.TP
\fB\-alrsamp\fR \fI1X | 2X | 4X | gray\fR
Specify the level of chrominance subsampling to be used when sending an
automatic lossless refresh (default: 1X.)  This has no effect unless
\fI-alrqual\fR is also specified.
.TP
\fB\-interframe\fR
Normally, the TurboVNC Server will enable interframe comparison whenever
Compression Level 5 or above is requested (if using Tight encoding, compression
levels 5-7 are equivalent to compression levels 0-2 with interframe comparison
enabled.)  Specifying \fB-interframe\fR will enable interframe comparison all
the time, regardless of the compression level that was requested by the viewer.
Interframe comparison maintains a copy of the remote framebuffer for each
connected viewer and compares each framebuffer update with the copy to ensure
that redundant updates are not sent to the viewer.  This prevents unnecessary
network traffic if an ill-behaved application draws the same thing over and
over again, but interframe comparison also causes the TurboVNC Server to use
more CPU time and much more memory, and thus it is recommended that this
feature be used only when needed.
.TP
\fB\-nointerframe\fR
Specifying this option will disable interframe comparison, regardless of the
compression level that was requested by the viewer.
.TP
\fB\-economictranslate\fR
Use less memory-hungry pixel format translation.
.TP
\fB\-desktop\fR \fIname\fR
Set VNC desktop name ("x11" by default).
.TP
\fB\-alwaysshared\fR
Always treat new connections as shared.  Never disconnect existing users
or deny new connections when a new user tries to connect to a VNC session that
is already occupied.
.TP
\fB\-nevershared\fR
Never treat new connections as shared.  Do not allow simultaneous user
connections to the same VNC session.
.TP
\fB\-dontdisconnect\fR
Don't disconnect existing users when a new non-shared connection is
established.  Instead, refuse the new connection.  The vncserver script
for TurboVNC sets this as the default, but you can modify the script
if you want to change the behavior.
.TP
\fB\-viewonly\fR
Don't accept keyboard and pointer events from clients.  All clients will
be able to see the desktop but won't be able to control it.
.TP
\fB\-localhost\fR
Only allow loopback connections from localhost.  This option is useful
in conjunction with SSH tunneling.  This option can be set for all TurboVNC
sessions on this system by using the \fIno-remote-connections\fR directive in
the authentication configuration file.  See the AUTHENTICATION CONFIGURATION
FILE section for more details.  Unless \fB-ipv6\fR is also specified, only
connections from IPv4 clients are accepted.
.TP
\fB\-interface\fR \fIipaddr\fR
Listen only on the network interface with the given \fIipaddr\fR.
.TP
\fB\-ipv6\fR
Enable IPv6 support.  If your system supports IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses, then
this option causes Xvnc to accept both local and remote connections from both
IPv4 and IPv6 clients.  Otherwise, only connections from IPv6 clients will be
accepted.  If \fB-localhost\fR is also specified, or if the
\fIno-remote-connections\fR directive is specified in the authentication
configuration file, then this option causes Xvnc to accept only local
connections from IPv6 clients (the equivalent of specifying
\fB-interface ::1\fR).
.TP
\fB\-inetd\fR
If Xvnc is launched by inetd, this option causes Xvnc to redirect
network input/output to stdin/stdout.
.TP
\fB\-compatiblekbd\fR
Set META and ALT keys to the same X modifier flag, as in the original
version of Xvnc by AT&T labs (this option is specific to TightVNC/TurboVNC.)
.SH AUTHENTICATION OVERVIEW
The Xvnc server supports the following methods for authenticating a VNC
client connection:
.IP \fBnone\fR
No authentication required.  Starting Xvnc with no authentication command-line
arguments sets the authentication method to "none".  If
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is specified in the authentication configuration
file and "none" is not listed as a permitted method, then Xvnc exits with an
error.

This authentication method can be used with VNC clients that understand the
RFB "None" security type or the "Tight" security type with the "None"
authentication scheme.
.IP \fBvnc\fR
VNC password authentication using a password set by the \fBvncpasswd\fR(1)
utility.  This method is enabled with the \fB-rfbauth\fR command-line argument
to Xvnc.  Additionally, if \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is specified in the
authentication configuration file, then "vnc" must be listed as a permitted
method.

This authentication method can be used with VNC clients that understand the RFB
"VNC" security type or the "Tight" security type with the "VNC" authentication
scheme.
.IP \fBotp\fR
One-time password (OTP) authentication using an OTP generated by the
\fBvncpasswd\fR(1) utility.  This method is enabled by passing a command-line
argument of \fB-otpauth\fR to Xvnc.  Additionally, if
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is specified in the authentication configuration
file, then "otp" must be listed as a permitted method.

This authentication method can be used with any VNC client that supports
standard VNC authentication.  OTP authentication is handy for sharing
a VNC session with another person with whom you do not wish to share your
VNC password.
.IP \fBpam-userpwd\fR
User/password authentication using Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM).
This is typically used to authenticate against Unix login credentials, but it
can also be used to authenticate against any other user/password authentication
credentials that can be accessed through PAM.  The PAM user/password
authentication method is enabled by passing a command-line argument of
\fB-pamauth\fR to Xvnc.  Additionally, if \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is
specified in the authentication configuration file, then "pam-userpwd" must be
listed as a permitted method.  Also, a valid PAM service configuration must
have been created by the system administrator (see the AUTHENTICATION
CONFIGURATION FILE section for details), and on some systems, it may be
necessary to make the Xvnc binary setuid root.

This authentication method can be used only with VNC clients that understand
the RFB protocol "Tight" security type with the "Unix login" authentication
scheme.
.P
The authentication method that will be selected when a VNC client connects
depends on the following:
.TP
\fBCommand-line authentication options\fR
The authentication options (\fB-rfbauth\fR, \fB-otpauth\fR and \fB-pamauth\fR)
allow you to request that the VNC password, OTP, and PAM user/password
authentication methods be enabled in Xvnc, respectively.  If none of these
options is specified, then this is the equivalent of requesting that no
authentication be used.
.TP
\fBThe \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fB directive\fR
If the authentication configuration file exists, then the system administrator
can use the \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR directive in this file to specify the
authentication methods that are allowed on the system.  An authentication
method must be both requested, by way of the Xvnc command-line options, and
permitted in order for it to be enabled.  If none of the authentication methods
meet this criteria, then Xvnc exits with an error.  For instance, if
"pam-userpwd" is the only permitted authentication method, then it is an error
to start Xvnc without an argument of \fB-pamauth\fR.

The \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR directive also allows you to specify the order
in which authentication schemes are advertised to VNC clients.  For
instance, if "pam-userpwd" is listed first, then the TurboVNC Viewer will
default to using Unix login authentication when connecting to any TurboVNC
sessions on this server.  Similarly, if "vnc" or "otp" is listed first, then
the TurboVNC Viewer will default to using standard VNC authentication.

If the authentication configuration file does not exist or
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR is not specified, then Xvnc behaves as if
\fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR was set to "vnc, otp, pam-userpwd, none".
.TP
\fBThe negotiated RFB protocol version\fR
This is determined by the VNC client's capabilities.  Older VNC clients that
support RFB version 3.3 can only use the "none", "vnc" and "otp"
authentication methods.  Newer clients that support RFB 3.7 or 3.8 with the
Tight VNC security type extension can use the "pam-userpwd" authentication
method, if the client has implemented it.

Authentication will fail if a VNC client that doesn't support the Tight VNC
security type extension connects to a TurboVNC server that only allows the
"pam-userpwd" authentication method.
.TP
\fBThe VNC client user interface\fR
The VNC client's user interface may place additional restrictions on what
authentication methods can be used.  For example, the TurboVNC Viewer has
command-line options that allow you to force the use of the VNC or Unix
login authentication schemes, regardless of which the server advertises as
the default.
.P
You can examine the Xvnc log file to see details of authentication
processing, including the authentication methods, RFB protocol versions,
and security types that have been enabled.
.SH AUTHENTICATION CONFIGURATION FILE
At startup, Xvnc reads authentication configuration information from
\fB/etc/turbovncserver-auth.conf\fR.  For security reasons, this pathname
is hard-coded into the Xvnc executable and cannot be changed without rebuilding
Xvnc.  If present, the authentication configuration file must be owned by
either root or by the user who started the Xvnc server, and the file may not be
writable by others.

Comment lines start with a hash (#) character.  Spaces and tabs are
ignored on lines containing configuration directives.  The configuration
directives are:

.IP \fIenable-user-acl\fR
If the "pam-userpwd" authentication method is used, then this directive enables
the Xvnc server's internal user access control list (ACL) to further limit
which users will be permitted to attempt PAM authentication.  Users can be
added to or removed from this list using the \fBvncpasswd\fR(1) utility.  The
user who started the Xvnc server will automatically be added to the access
control list.
.IP \fImax-idle-timeout\fR=\fItime\fR
This specifies the maximum idle timeout (in seconds) for all TurboVNC sessions
running on this machine.  The idle timeout is the amount of time that a
TurboVNC session can remain idle (with no VNC viewer connections) before
Xvnc automatically exits.  If this value is set to a number greater than 0,
then all TurboVNC sessions on this machine will use this idle timeout value by
default, and the user will only be allowed to override it with a lower value.
.IP \fIno-clipboard-send\fR
This prevents any TurboVNC server sessions running on this machine from
sending clipboard changes to their connected viewers.
.IP \fIno-clipboard-recv\fR
This prevents any TurboVNC server sessions running on this machine from
receiving clipboard changes from their connected viewers.
.IP \fIno-reverse-connections\fR
Do not allow reverse connections to be made from any TurboVNC server running on
this machine.  This causes Xvnc to ignore requests from the
\fBvncconnect\fR(1) utility.
.IP \fIno-remote-connections\fR
Do not allow inbound remote connections to be made to any TurboVNC server
running on this machine.  Only connections from localhost can be made, which
effectively forces the use of SSH tunneling to make inbound remote connections.
.IP \fIpam-service-name\fR=\fIsvcname\fR
Sets the service name to be used when Xvnc performs PAM authentication.  The
default service name is \fIturbovnc\fR.  This typically corresponds to a file
in \fB/etc/pam.d\fR or to a token in \fB/etc/pam.conf\fR.  For instance, if
your system has a file named \fB/etc/pam.d/passwd\fR, then copying this file to
\fB/etc/pam.d/{svcname}\fR would cause the username and password sent by the
VNC viewer to be validated against \fB/etc/passwd\fR.
.IP \fIpermitted-auth-methods\fR=\fImethod\fR[,\fImethod\fR[...]]
Defines the initial set of permitted authentication methods.  Multiple
comma-separated methods may be specified.  Accepted values for \fImethod\fR
are: \fInone\fR, \fIvnc\fR, \fIotp\fR, and \fIpam-userpwd\fR.  The order in
which these methods are specified defines the order in which Xvnc will
advertise the corresponding RFB security types and authentication schemes
to the VNC client.  This ordering may affect which authentication scheme
the VNC client chooses as its default.
.SH SECURITY CONCERNS
.P
There are many security problems inherent in VNC.  Thus, it is
recommended that you restrict network access to Xvnc servers from untrusted
network addresses.  Probably the best way to secure an Xvnc server is to
allow only loopback connections from the server machine (using the
\fB\-localhost\fR option) and to use SSH tunneling for remote access
to the Xvnc server.  For details on using TurboVNC with SSH tunneling, see the
TurboVNC User's Guide.
.P
It is incumbent upon the system administrator to ensure that an authentication
method meets the security requirements for a particular site before it is
permitted to be used.  In particular, caution should be exercised when using
authentication methods that support the Unix login authentication scheme.
Unless SSH tunneling or another suitable encryption mechanism is enforced, then
the use of Unix login authentication will result in Unix passwords being sent
unencrypted over the network.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBvncserver\fR(1), \fBvncviewer\fR(1), \fBvncpasswd\fR(1),
\fBvncconnect\fR(1), \fBsshd\fR(1)
.SH AUTHORS
VNC was originally developed at AT&T Laboratories Cambridge.  TightVNC
additions were implemented by Constantin Kaplinsky.  TurboVNC, based
on TightVNC, is provided by The VirtualGL Project.  Many other people
participated in development, testing and support.

\fBMan page authors:\fR
.br
Marcus Brinkmann <Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de>
.br
Tim Waugh <twaugh@redhat.com>
.br
Constantin Kaplinsky <const@tightvnc.com>
.br
D. R. Commander <information@virtualgl.org>
.br
Craig Ruff <cruff@ucar.edu>
