'\" t
.\" ** The above line should force tbl to be a preprocessor **
.\" Man page for X vncpasswd
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Red Hat, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2003 Constantin Kaplinsky
.\" Copyright (C) 2005-2008 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file LICENCE.TXT that comes with the
.\" TightVNC distribution.
.\"
.TH vncpasswd 1 "August 2008" "" "TurboVNC"
.SH NAME
vncpasswd \- set passwords for VNC server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vncpasswd
.RI [\| file \|]
.br
.B vncpasswd
.IR \-t
.br
.B vncpasswd
.IR \-f
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBvncpasswd\fR utility can be used to create and change
passwords for Xvnc (the TurboVNC virtual X server.) \fBXvnc\fR uses these
passwords when started with the \fB\-rfbauth\fR command line option
(or when started from the \fBvncserver\fR script.)

\fBvncpasswd\fR allows one to enter a primary VNC password and an
optional view-only password. \fBXvnc\fR will ignore mouse and keyboard
input from clients who authenticated with the view-only password.

The password file name defaults to \fB$HOME/.vnc/passwd\fR, unless the
\fB\-t\fR command line option was used (see the OPTIONS section
below.) The \fB$HOME/.vnc/\fR directory will be created if it does not
exist.

Each password has to be longer than five characters (unless the
\fB\-f\fR command line option was used-- see its description below.) 
Only the first eight characters are significant. If the primary
password is too short, the vncpasswd program will abort. If the view-only
password is too short, then only the primary password will be saved.

Unless a file name was provided in the command line explicitly, then this
utility may perform certain sanity checks to prevent writing a
password file into some hazardous place.

If at least one password was saved successfully, \fBvncpasswd\fR will
exit with status code 0. Otherwise it will exit with status code 1.
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-t\fR
Write passwords into \fB/tmp/$USER-vnc/passwd\fR, creating the
\fB/tmp/$USER-vnc/\fR directory if it does not exist and checking the
permissions on that directory (the mode must be 700.) This option can
help to improve security if your home directory is shared on the
network (e.g. when using NFS.)
.TP
\fB\-f\fR
Filter mode. Read plain-text passwords from stdin, and write encrypted
versions to stdout. One or two passwords (full-control and view-only)
can be supplied in the input stream, with a new line terminating each password. 
Note that in filter mode, short or even empty passwords will be
silently accepted.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBvncserver\fR(1), \fBXvnc\fR(1), \fBvncviewer\fR(1),
\fBvncconnect\fR(1)
.SH AUTHORS
VNC was originally developed at AT&T Laboratories Cambridge. TightVNC
additions were implemented by Constantin Kaplinsky. TurboVNC, based
on TightVNC, is provided by The VirtualGL Project. Many other people
participated in development, testing and support.

\fBMan page authors:\fR
.br
Marcus Brinkmann <Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de>,
.br
Tim Waugh <twaugh@redhat.com>,
.br
Constantin Kaplinsky <const@tightvnc.com>
.br
Darrell Commander <dcommander@users.sourceforge.net>
