'\" t
.\" ** The above line should force tbl to be a preprocessor **
.\" Man page for vncserver
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, opal@debian.org
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001 Red Hat, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 Constantin Kaplinsky <const@ce.cctpu.edu.ru>
.\"
.\" You may distribute under the terms of the GNU General Public
.\" License as specified in the file LICENCE.TXT that comes with the
.\" TightVNC distribution.
.\"
.TH vncserver 1 "December 2005" "" "TurboVNC"
.SH NAME
vncserver \- a wrapper to launch an X server for VNC.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBvncserver\fR
[:\fIdisplay\fR] [\-geometry \fIwidth\fRx\fIheight\fR]
[\-pixelformat rgb\fI888\fR|bgr\fI888\fR] [\-name \fIdesktop\-name\fR]
[\fIXvnc\-options\fR...]
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR \-kill :\fIdisplay\fR
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR \-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBvncserver\fR is a wrapper script for \fBXvnc\fR, the free X server
for VNC (Virtual Network Computing). Xvnc provides all of the capabilities of a
standard X server, but it does not connect to a physical display.
Instead, \fBXvnc\fR creates a virtual desktop which you can view or control
remotely using a VNC viewer.
.SH OPTIONS
You can add \fBXvnc\fR options to the \fBvncserver\fR command line. They will be
passed through to Xvnc without modification. The options provided by
\fBvncserver\fR itself are as follows:
.TP
\fB:\fR\fIdisplay\fR
The X display number which Xvnc should occupy. If omitted, the next free display number
is used.
.TP
\fB\-geometry\fR \fIwidth\fR\fBx\fR\fIheight\fR
Set width and height of the virtual desktop.
.TP
\fB\-pixelformat\fR \fBrgb888\fR
On Big Endian systems (e.g. Sparc), this causes the TurboVNC server to
use ARGB pixel ordering for the virtual desktop instead of the default
of ABGR.
.TP
\fB\-pixelformat\fR \fBbgr888\fR
On Little Endian systems (e.g. x86), this causes the TurboVNC server
to use RGBA pixel ordering for the virtual desktop instead of the
default of BGRA.
.TP
\fB\-name\fR \fIstring\fR
This specifies the name of the desktop.
.TP
\fB\-kill\fR \fB:\fR\fIdisplay\fR
Stops the VNC server which is currently running on the specified display.
.TP
\fB\-help\fR
Prints a brief list of command line options
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR
Starts \fBXvnc\fR on the next available display and uses suitable
defaults.
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR \fI:1\fR
Starts \fBXvnc\fR on display :1.
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR \fI\-geometry 1024x768 :1\fR
Starts \fBXvnc\fR on display :1 with desktop size of 1024x768 pixels.
.TP
\fBvncserver\fR \fI\-kill :1\fR
Shuts down the \fBXvnc\fR server running on display :1.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBXvnc\fR(1), \fBvncviewer\fR(1), \fBvncpasswd\fR(1), \fBvncconnect\fR(1)
.SH AUTHORS
VNC was originally developed at AT&T Laboratories Cambridge. TightVNC
additions were implemented by Constantin Kaplinsky. TurboVNC, based
on TightVNC, is provided by The VirtualGL Project. Many other people
participated in development, testing and support.

\fBMan page authors:\fR
.br
Marcus Brinkmann <Marcus.Brinkmann@ruhr-uni-bochum.de>,
.br
Tim Waugh <twaugh@redhat.com>,
.br
Constantin Kaplinsky <const@ce.cctpu.edu.ru>
.br
Darrell Commander <dcommander@users.sourceforge.net>
